hello and welcome to equation stripped
in this episode I'm going to be
stripping back the normal distribution
layer-by-layer so that everyone can
understand the importance of the normal
distribution stems from the fact that
it's a Swiss Army knife of probability
distributions it can be used to fit
almost any set of data and the reason
for this is pretty simple really if you
take any set of real world data there is
an average or a mean value and most
other data points tend to cluster around
this value and then as you move further
and further away from the average you
tend to get fewer and fewer points so
the probability decreases let's consider
a real example and look at height of
humans so in the UK the average male
height is 5 foot and 10 inches which is
about 178 centimeters the average female
hides the last 5 foot 5 which is about
hundred sixty-four centimeters and of
course you can have people that are much
much taller say 7 or 8 foot tall or
people that are much shorter maybe only
4 foot tall but they are much much less
likely than the people that are around 5
foot 5 for females 5 foot 10 for males
so you yourself might not be exactly
that value but you're probably within a
few inches either side and this is the
tendency of the data to cluster around
the average and cluster around the mean
value and the same pattern will appear
in all different kinds of real world
data sets and real world variables so
we've looked at height we could have
considered weight you find the same
pattern we could have looked at say the
number of children in a family we could
have looked at salaries again there will
be an average value whether data will
cluster together and then it will tail
off for the extreme ends streaming back
to our second layer we're now going to
look at a plot of the normal
distribution we are going to draw it
graph so beginning on this very first
term here this one divided by the square
root of two times pi times Sigma so
these are all just constant numbers we
have two we have pi we have some Sigma
which is just a number and so this whole
thing here is a constant we're going to
call it a it's some number now here we
have the exponential numbers of E which
is 2.71828 my favorite number and then E
is taken to a power again looking at
most of the terms in here we have
various constants we have mu which is a
constant we have 2 Sigma squared they
are all again constant terms they are
just numbers and so the important bit in
this power that e is being raised to is
the X term and we can see that the main
behavior is going to be dominated by x
squared and importantly we have a minus
sign in front of this and so this whole
term basically looks like e to the power
minus x squared so we have a constant
times e to the minus x squared and this
now allows us to draw a rough plot of
what the function looks like
and so plotting our function what we
actually have is what's known as this
lovely bell-shaped curve because it kind
of looks like a bell you have a peak in
the middle and then as you move away as
x increases in the positive direction or
as X decreases in the negative direction
it begins to tail off now that we
understand this lovely bell-shaped curve
that's formed by plotting the normal
distribution you can hopefully begin to
see how this relates to all of those
real-world data sets that I mentioned in
layer one because if you line up your
peak here this central value if you line
that up with your average and you'll see
that the highest probability the values
of the curve most often will be near the
mean value and as you move further and
further away those values become less
and less common there's a much lower
probability of the extreme events from
happening and that is why this
tribution tends to fit data so well now
that we've stripped back to the third
leg we're going to look at the
individual terms in our equation in the
normal distribution beginning on the
left hand side we have Phi of X which is
our probability density function and
this tells you the probability of
finding the value X in your set of data
moving to the right hand side we have
this constant which before we just
called a and this is made up of the
number two the number pi 3.14 and Sigma
now here Sigma is the standard deviation
and this just tells you how quickly your
data decreases away from that average
value so in some sense it gives you the
spread of the data so I've drawn three
bell-shaped curves over here they are
all examples of a normal distribution
and we have three different values of
Sigma for the black curve we have Sigma
1 for the green curve Sigma 2 for the
red curve Sigma 3 and as I said the
standard deviation tells you how spread
out the data is away from your mean so
how fast the sort of curve decays as you
move away from the average value and so
you can see for example for the green
curve you very quickly decrease as you
move away from the mean value in your
data whereas for the red curve you only
see a slight decrease so the red curve
has a much larger spread and the green
curve has a much smaller spread so in
terms of the standard deviation values
you would have the largest value would
be Sigma 3 because the data is the most
spread out and the smallest value would
be Sigma 2 because the data is very
concentrated around this central mean
peak and then Sigma 1 would lie in
between the two going back to our
equation and moving further over to the
exponential term remember we have the
number E which is 2.71828 then we have
this power the in
the ears raised to and this depends on
our independent variable X it depends on
the value in the data that you want to
know the probability of hitting we then
have a 2 Sigma squared on the
denominator and in the top we have this
new symbol mu so mu here is just the
mean value of the data so it is just the
average value across all of the data
points and if you go back to our graph
over here based on our very simple form
of the equation we found that the peak
was located when your power became 0 and
so in the form of the normal
distribution we can see that when x
equals mu so when your data point hits
that average that mean value your
exponential term is to a zero power and
becomes 1 and so the maximum value this
peak will actually occur when X is equal
to MU the mean value of your data
stripping back to our fourth and final
layer I'm going to talk about how the
normal distribution is used in practice
with two examples the first one is to
define the average person mister or
missus average so this relates back to
layer 1 when I was talking about all of
the different sets of data can be
modeled by our normal distribution
precisely because they have this
bell-shaped characteristic curve to the
data the idea is to take the average of
all of these different characteristics
and use that to define your average
person so the average person for example
would have 2.3 children the average
person in the UK would be 5 foot and
seven and a half inches combining the
average of males and females you get
some quite silly results like the
average person has slightly less than
one breast and has one testicle so those
last two bars aren't that insightful but
knowing the age of your audience or if
you're popular
and knowing how many children they have
very useful things when it comes to
marketing and advertising for you to
define mr. or mrs. average and then aim
your product at that person another
really important way in which the normal
distribution is used is in testing the
significance of experimental results
suppose you are trying in new drug so
this is a good example because this is
exactly the kind of thing where the
normal distribution and hypothesis
testing are use so you're trying your
new drug and you have a group of
patients and say you find that when
given the drug the patients is twice as
likely to survive this disease and have
their treatment be a success now you
want to know whether or not that
increase in survival rate was due to
your drug or due to complete chance and
so the way to do them is to work out
what is the probability that this result
occurred completely by chance so you
assume that your data are normally
distributed and then you can read off
the particular value the particular
probability that this was just a
complete chance event so if your
probability is below nor point naught 5
then you can say that your results are
significant at being 95% level or if
it's below naught point naught 1 you can
say that your results are significant at
the 99% level so you can never be
completely certain that the results were
not due to complete chance but you can
at least assign a specific value a
specific probability of how confident
you are that those results were
significant so there you have it from
defining your average person with one
breast and one testicle to deciding
whether or not a drug in a clinical
trial is a success or not the normal
distribution is incredibly important
thank you very much for watching I hope
you've enjoyed the video and most
importantly I hope you've learnt a lot
about the normal distribution please do
subscribe to my channel if you like what
I'm doing also check out my website Tom
Knox
it's calm you can find me on Facebook
Twitter Instagram at Tom rocks Max and I
will see you soon with another episode
of equation stripped